410 people have tested negative in the
provincial laboratory as usual on day
number 2 you'll almost cada curva
dezhnev oliver Brunswick voici comma
Sica zombie party said cacan film a cat
kappa bob cats on this person I am you
received a negative vote SDP stars
affects people elaborate well promise
y'all remember we must each take
responsibility for our actions
please stay home with your families and
limit your contact with others when you
must be in contact with others outside
your home try to stay at least 2 meters
or 6 feet apart from other people make
sure you wash your hands frequently and
coughin sneeze into your elbow
these are stressful times and we must
all do our best to manage the stress we
are all feeling there are things that
you can do to take care of yourself you
can eat healthy get some fresh air some
balanced meals and get regular exercise
and plenty of sleep if you experience
stress reactions in response to Kove 819
for several days in a row and you're
unable to carry out normal
responsibilities because of them contact
your health care provider or your local
addictions and mental health center help
is also available through Kids Help
Phone and by visiting their website at
www.ge.com 800 six six eight six eight
six eight deputies are faster I love
free Polly loot XD excuse a text a Apple
a pay out lol the sister eats its roots
is fit for
propylaea Vaquero
[Music]
calculating the weight with a writ zero
zero city street c-suite C Street you
can also contact the Chima helpline at
[Music]
good afternoon mojo after serious
deliberation with my cabinet colleagues
and the all-party Cabinet Committee on
Kovan 19 it is my duty to inform you of
the government of New Brunswick is
declaring a state of emergency today
under the emergency measures act I want
every New Brunswick er to know that this
is a step that we are not taking lightly
or thought could series serious
consideration of its impact jibu Cotulla
jean de Novo's week Saskatoon majora
canoe come on tre I'll sue you
it couldn't open all Tribune saw unpack
most of runs occurs are acting
responsibly and following the advice of
dr. Russell they're doing this because
they know that stayin home and
maintaining social distances will save
lives but it has become clear that there
are still too many people in our
province who are not following the
advice of our public health officials or
are deliberately ignoring them this has
compelled our government to take these
extraordinary measures under the
emergency measures act we have ensured a
declaration of emergency in mandatory
order which compels businesses their
employees and members of the public to
act in the interest of flattening the
curve of this outbreak
Oliver - de la la silly measure does
wrong Nunez 7a me on declaration Virgil
key oh please
risotto pre lure employee le mem do
public aprende image are poor planea
liqueur the set exposure effective
immediately we are ordering the
following actions under Section 10 of
the emergency measures act public
schools universities and colleges will
remain closed until further notice all
retail businesses must cease to admit
the public but may continue with online
or delivery sales exemptions will be
made for the following grocery stores
pharmacies stores operated by Mb liquor
and canvas and be automotive repair
businesses
post offices gas stations hardware
stores all food and beverage serving
businesses will only offer takeout and
delivery services all bars and other
establishments are
under Liquor Control Act will close
immediately Hair Stylist barber shop
spas and salons must cease operations
all construction activity is prohibited
with exception of repairs to maintaining
key public infrastructure in this regard
the point is to avoid public access
construction activity that is not public
facing that is not a situation where
we're working in an area that does not
see the public interact every day we can
look at those services as as independent
but not exposing the public or the
workers that work there all cinemas
theatres gyms tennis courts dance
studios and other recreational and
public entertainment facilities must
stop admitting members of the public
immediately any premise where people
typically gather in large numbers must
take all responsible steps to prevent
gatherings on more than 10 people all
facilities that do remain open will
reduce to critical function and will
take every reasonable step required to
prevent people who exhibit symptoms of
kovin 19 from entering the workplace
they will also take every reasonable
step required to prevent people from
entering workplaces who have traveled
internationally in the previous 14 days
in addition employers will be required
to take all reasonable actions to ensure
employees who are at work have not been
exposed to the virus and to ensure their
compliance with self isolation if they
have been exposed
anyone who has been outside the country
who has been advised to self isolate who
has been advised by a physician to do so
must now bylaw compliant with these
directives these are unprecedented
actions but these are necessary as we
are in unprecedented times this will
provide us with the tools we need to
ensure the safety of New Brunswickers
the message we're sending to the people
of New Brunswick today is the same as
we've been saying over the past week
residents who are not essential workers
need to stay home businesses who are not
public-facing can continue to operate
but they need to do so by protecting
their workforce and following all
compliance rules around distancing they
need to do so to ensure that the spread
of this virus is not allowed not our
massage Jean de New Brunswick Oh Jude we
sell mm massage
Kanoe repertoire dupuis of smelly
residue kina some pottery tava are
essential to our estate alabanza
you should only leave the house for
groceries and other essential items if
you must interact with people outside of
your household maintain a distance of 6
feet or 2 meters before this was a
recommendation today it's a requirement
I feel strongly that the decision to
declare a state of emergency is the best
way to protect all New Brunswickers and
to avoid the dire situations that we're
seeing in other places around the world
this week on Baku colour desicion the
Dakar a la tte de Jonge al-ahmadi or
many are depreciated Li Zhong de novo
spongebuck idiom detail a situation on
difficile kanuda this f1v daughter and
walk down limo I know that many
residents are experiencing unexpected
economic impacts because due to the
nature of their job they may not have
the option of working from home
therefore part of the emergency
declaration will suspend the authority
of landlords to evict tenants for
non-payment of rent through May 31st we
are still analyzing the federal aid
package announced yesterday and we will
continue to evaluate the details and
identify any gaps in the support of
impacted New Brunswickers I know many
will be concerned by our decision to
declare a state of emergency but I am
confident that these measures will
result in New Brunswickers taking the
actions necessary the safety of all
residents must continue to be our key
priority I mentioned the analysis of the
federal package we will continue that
today tomorrow will bring updates
precisely on what that means to New
Brunswickers and identify as many areas
as we can in terms of any gaps that are
exists and what the the fund that's been
proposed actually provide it's important
that we all do our part to contribute to
this goal of saving lives and protecting
citizens I believe we can do it I
believe we can not only flatten the
curve we can ensure that we maintain a
very effective health care system for
all through this through the
pandemic thank you merci
[Music]
Mike Silas Brown global news premier
wood this decoration with this allow the
province to potentially jail people who
do not follow self-isolation rules at
this point I think I want to emphasize
that this this goes from a
recommendation to do declaration and a
requirement yes it does get those sort
of key of authorities rules but that is
not our intent nor do we hope that we
get there but I think that the residents
need to understand that we only do this
to ensure that this ruse rules these
requirements must be followed this is
not optional this is not something we'll
think about this is something we're
doing and as a result we will put
whatever measures are necessary beyond
this to ensure that it gets followed but
at this stage I'm counting on to Brunn's
appears to recognized
if this wasn't serious I wouldn't be
doing this and that is the reason that
we're doing this declaration today to
refer thurr confirm just how serious the
situation we are in you have a follow-up
yeah what would those potential
additional measures look like at this
point obviously this is pretty
far-reaching as well I think at this
stage what we're saying is the measures
we put in place in them and the
communique that we'll have today
identifies very clearly you know the
areas that we're concerned that we need
to follow and and I think it's it's
clear that we expect businesses that are
not public facing to be able to continue
to operate at the same time protecting
their employees because it's it's it's a
must that they might do so so that's not
optional but you get further beyond that
as to what would be required for I guess
in the terms of enforcement again I say
I hope we're not into that stage because
every new brother is going to consider
stand how important this is and and the
necessity of doing this is to protect
their own health and their family
members health and their grandparents
health and and their neighbors health
and it so it's not
nothing more than being able to ensure
the health and safety of our citizens
Matthew koma blackity nouvelle I came
here I understand that we'll get more
information about this later but I think
a lot of parents and maybe also a lot of
decaf writers with us - I get it updates
on the Seas and what's going on with all
this because there's some we're doing
some different vintages and some people
that are quite angry with tamesha and
the idea be be getting charged even if
they're not getting the service and
don't like that yes Matthew and I
tomorrow there's gonna be a full
technical brief briefing on the daycare
discussion and who pays and who doesn't
and and how that's all going to work so
so all the details will be brought out
in that technical review tomorrow so III
won't get into those facts but every
question will be answered I think it's
important to - in all of the finance or
consideration because it goes far
reaching into every aspect of what
people do in their daily lives and and
that's why I wanted to take the time to
understand in terms of the financial aid
package exactly what that means and then
we can understand are there any gaps how
do we address those gaps so tomorrow our
our goal will be provide a more
comprehensive package but on the daycare
situation particularly there's a
tentacle brief plan for tomorrow morning
and and all those questions will be
answered in detail Thank You Matthew
Stevie do you have a follow up questions
mr. Bramer can you that's certainly our
goal because it's a requirement row
absolutely is a requirement so we want
to be sure that every essential workers
and needs taker will indeed get it that
is a must and that is our goal
Thank You Elizabeth CDC hi there my
question is for the premiere I'm still
trying to understand how these measures
that are in place
will they be enforced and what will be
the penalty if they're not followed
I think the point of doing this at this
stage is is ramping up the idea that it
seemed to be prevalent in the community
I mean we'd certainly see a reduced
activity there seemed to be some
confusion confusion of whether it was
optional or not optional
I think today's declaration is very
clearly stated and understood this is
not optional so first and foremost if
someone thinks it's okay to just you
know carry on with with large large
crowds gathering or events planned as
usual that is not an optional it is a it
is a requirement now not to do so now
I'm a girl repeat what I said earlier
I'm optimistic that that New
Brunswickers will take this seriously
we're doing this to not get ourselves in
a situation like we've seen in Europe
and like we're seeing in other countries
we want to avoid that so I all right now
stay on the side of I'm hoping this
raises the level of urgency enough that
people take it like we must do this we
cannot consider that party we plan to go
to next Saturday night as a normal
activity because that is not normal
anymore now beyond that we will we will
be assessing you know are people
listening are they paying attention or
are they actually putting people at risk
and then we'll decide from their next
steps right now it's just this is no
longer request this is a mandatory
requirement yes this is for a dr.
Russell we asked the other day what
requirements are in place for people who
respect day of copn 19 and tell their
employer and get tested and what people
can do if they suspect a colleague CAD
Kovan 19 but it isn't getting tested we
respectfully ask that question again
doctors are obligated to report cases
for the public's protection are there no
requirements for self reporting or
social reporting
well I think that the answer that I gave
the other day I believe was around the
fact that in any situation where
somebody is not well and shouldn't be
reporting to work that's between them
and their employer but obviously in this
situation that that employee you're
talking about somebody who has symptoms
and has reported to work despite that
fact sorry you're the situation you're
asking is around if somebody reports to
their workplace and has symptoms yes and
so are there no requirements though for
for self reporting or social reporting
like where again I think that the
workplace setting is that it's the
employer who would have jurisdiction
over that that particular situation in
terms of they're there they're there in
a workplace situation and their employer
would be able to direct them to go home
and self isolate and call eight one one
okay I think that's what we're still
wondering these confirmed cases where
are they in the province
what areas yeah my I've given that
information I guess three different
zones as my understandings to the
central part of the province the
southern part of the province and the
south eastern part of the province Thank
You Cameron CTV thank you Bruce this is
a question for the premier first off
premier you sound disappointed
even angry with some New Brunswickers
who are not complying with what we're
not complying with the recommendation
the recommended closings I'm wondering
could you tell us who was not what did
you see in terms of non-compliance who
did you see not complying with your
recommendations that that made you so
disappointed and angry well I don't want
to I guess I like to disappoint in angry
part the concern part I would I would
certainly want to make reference to my
concern
if you go by a shopping mall you go by
some of the the bigger stores and
you see lots of cars in the parking lot
you know how many people are buying
groceries and how many people are still
retail shopping as they once were you
know the case of some of the confusions
around restaurants so some were open you
know and trying to manage the actual
distancing but I think the the activity
was really had gone down a lot so so in
the case of looking at this and saying
all right let's be clear I talked to the
Restaurant Association I talked to the
Canadian Federation of Independent
Business folks I talked to you know the
manufacturing group construction
industry so the idea was getting clarity
and will continue to do that as we roll
along but where we see people getting
together as usual where we see people
feeling like you know people are coming
home and and and and they're getting
together with their friends as they
always did that's the time that we need
to think of okay how do we change the
game
so changing the messaging here and
declaring the state of emergency raises
the bar higher it brings a sense of
urgency that this is not a game
this is not just as I said yeah it's not
an exercise this is real time real life
and and and real life-and-death
situations that we want to make sure
that we are minimizing risk to the
Brunswickers and and I'd like to just
add also that one of the big risks that
has been pointed out that not related to
the retail business has been related to
the many snowbirds returning home from
the south and the fact that you know
they're coming into airports or they're
driving back home and being picked up by
family and friends just as they would
normally and and then be going home so
now their family and friends are they're
supposed to go to self-isolation but the
family of friends are now potentially
you know impacted so let's just think
about the day-to-day activities that we
have underway and what do I need to
change to ensure that I'm not being
exposed or I'm not exposing somebody
else and and those are the concerns it's
it's not it's not an anger it's a
concern that we believe that oh it won't
happen to me and you know what it's
happened to a lot of people and right
now
folks in Italy are saying I wish I'd
have paid more attention so I want
people in New Brunswick to be ahead of
the curve and pay a whole lot of
attention and do it in time yes the
difference thank you this is for dr.
Russell we know if you and the premier
have been asking people not to contact
eight one one with unnecessary calls now
we've been told that some people calling
eight one one with possible symptoms
have to wait three days for a nurse to
get back to them to decide if they
should be tested is is that the status
of 8.1 right now a three-day leg between
call and call back and if you have any
concern about that so my understanding
is that there are additional resources
being put in place today to address that
thank you Mike
Vicki Homer sorry Tony DeeDee yes I have
a follow-up from yesterday's question
now that it's the state of emergency and
without revealing identities are you now
informing municipal leaders if they have
cases in their communities so that they
can take greater emergency measures I
guess I don't know if that was for me or
the doctor Russell but it's Blaine here
in relation to the the city of the
emergency it doesn't change anything
particularly for information it's being
shared back and forth but it just
changes the height of awareness that the
problems is putting on this this
situation and expecting that civic
leaders as well as as any any leaders
throughout the province are taking the
necessary precautions in their
communities to to ensure that rules are
being followed
Vicki do you have a follow-up yes it's
for dr. Russell we know how many
ventilators we have a New Brunswick and
EF efforts to get more so my
understanding through my connections
with the Emergency Operations Committee
and the RHA is is that New Brunswick has
one of the highest number of acute care
beds per capita in the country
and so we're moving ALC patients so we
really want to make sure that we have
the right capacity to deal with its
outbreak and the RHS are in the process
of finalizing them the number of enters
that will be available and as well the
additional units that what they will be
able to order and that staff will be
able to operate to deal with this
outbreak so that will be available
tomorrow and it's taking additional time
if they're implementing their pandemic
plans which included the repurposing of
equipment and staff across the network
Thank You Danielle McCready CDC high
ended question for the premiere we are
hearing reports of health care workers
going back to work after returning from
international travel without self
isolating for 14 days we are also even
hearing that they're being instructed to
do so I guess what can you tell us about
about that well I'd be very comfortable
comfortable in saying that they're not
being instructed to do so I mean that is
part of our protocol so there are no
additional rules or that don't apply to
that apply to them that don't apply to
everybody else I mean everyone has to
self isolate for 14 days we are we are
asking people to return into the health
care profession if they have that
opportunity but we want to ensure
they're healthy and doing so so there
are no special exceptions there in that
regard Danielle do you have a follow-up
yes they do Bruce we've also been
hearing from multiple people who are
working in call centers that they are
continuing to operate as normal
without any social distancing efforts I
guess given this new announcement that
there is a state of emergency declared
we'll call centers be ordered to close I
would say that it's very clear that it's
no longer a voluntary exercise so we
expect contact centers and any other
activity to fully comply with the
distinct distancing safe distancing
requirement so so there should be any
confusion and every employee has the
right to say I need to be within a safe
distance according to the rules required
by the government and the health
authorities and as dictated by the
Health Office we we would expect them to
comply we expect the businesses new
still need to find a way to operate
and to run and they will need to keep
essential workers to do that but we're
asking businesses to to define what the
essential worker requirement is we've
met we've talked here this morning about
the public facing so we don't have
impact from the public coming and going
in businesses so we need to stop that
but businesses in a call center that do
not meet the required distancing need to
change their configuration to ensure
that they do so thank you angel of ABAP
TM hello the question is for the
emergency what is the provincial
government doing to help well certainly
our organization the mo organization has
spread out all across the province and
are in touch with the civic leaders of
the mayors and councils in what we're
doing the the idea of what the impact is
financially is feeding back into into
the government so we're assessing that
for both businesses and and other
services in a community whether it be
through through shelters food food banks
soup kitchens any activities that our
community is currently providing that's
being negatively impacted by the
restrictions required to protect health
are being assessed and we as I said in a
previous president previous announcement
a few days ago we only ensure that we
provide the necessary assistance whether
it be financially or whether it be
through personnel to to make sure that
infected impacted communities are kept
all individuals are protected both for
their well-being in health and in in
their capabilities to survive yes I do a
couple days ago Prime Minister Trudeau
announced package of 300 million and
then he said that initiative communities
are at higher risk across the country so
what is the province of New Brunswick to
prepare this when it does hit with
communities that there is there going to
be more health workers are there more
testing kids prepare and what about the
treatment of these at-risk good so there
may be you know dr. Russell take this
question but in two
of of us in in doing all these
mitigating efforts to minimize the
impact you know our goal is to manage
this flatten this curve so we can stay
within the capabilities our health
system we're seeing a lot of action
happening now within the system in order
to control this and not let it get to a
point where decisions have to be made
that are that are you know let's say a
necessity rather than just part of the
routine business we we believe we have
adequate supplies to meet this challenge
but we need people to pay attention in
order to see that the challenge doesn't
exceed what our expectations are
unnecessarily because people aren't
following the rules so I feel pretty
comfortable that you know we can do this
if people just listen and and start to
take it very seriously
so you're saying right now that you're
just trying to coming watch what's going
on and see if this makes any difference
can you tell us exactly how it is that
you're gonna watch them and you're gonna
have looked as driving around looking at
what people are doing and and at what
point are you gonna decide okay we're
not gonna take this anymore we're going
to start fining people or arresting them
or whatever well I think the the
observation part of that Andrew in terms
of surveillance and understanding if the
communities are indeed responding we
will we will absolutely be surveying the
situation will be monitoring activities
in public spaces and and understanding
if this is being followed so I'll be
asking every community to do that
whether it be you know police officers
or whether it be health officers that
will be in the community just keeping
their eyes open and that can be anybody
that can be anybody from government
officials in an official capacity or
citizens that basically feel that you
know we're not following the rules in
this community as well as we could be so
we're really asking everyone to be eyes
and ears on the ground to help us to
understand that that we are meeting the
requirements and we are following that
following the rules and minimizing risks
to each other
I have another point I just need to race
and it was a it has a relation to I
think when I was reading my document in
relation to the construction activity
I wanted to reinforce that construction
activity is not prohibited I think I
read it like it was a construction
activity is not prohibited we expect
that we will continue we need to allow
people to continue to do their their
work the point that's being made here is
simply if it's a forward facing business
if it's a public facing business so the
the office where people might come in
and out or work can be done at home in
such cases but we recognize that
construction workers fabrication shops
you know industries that are not in the
public view day in day out or have
exposures need to operate we need to
keep as much moving as we can in the
economy and that does not constitute any
particular risk and and in these
facilities we are asking companies to do
a self-assessment identify essential
workers and identify those workers that
can be protected go to work every day
and meet the health requirements that
are now being reduced the the hours are
being changed the activity within the
stores is being changed in terms of how
many people can get in they are
basically keeping and respecting the
distance and requirements and the
numbers in the stores you know the
concern is that this turns into a black
market situation and and and we end up
with with more problems that we have a
greater difficulty to try to manage so
at this time we've we've decided we
would continue to operate the stores we
continue to operate within the health
guidelines and Emilee provide you know
that service to the public but again
like everything else it'll be monitored
and if if indeed it becomes a situation
that we cannot operate within the health
and safety guidelines will make changes
thank you
Angell dr. Russell would like to so
because this is a really rapidly
involving situation the measures that
are in place right now allow us to kind
of hit the pause button to see what
effects these have because when you look
at mathematical modeling and projections
and and pandemic planning there are many
many factors that are taken to account
when when things are unfolding so
rapidly so at this moment in time we
have a certain number of cases and we
don't see community transmission at this
point in time but we expect to see it
and and this breathing space that we
have that protects our healthcare system
right now is allowing us to gather more
information a lot of the modeling that's
happened right now happened out of China
we have some from the public health
agency of Canada but the real-time data
that we're getting in Canada around
hospitalization lengths of stays and
those kind of things will be very very
important when we look at whatever
whatever other things we need to put in
place as things unfold again
and we expect to see more travel related
cases that I think will still continue
to happen
along with clusters of close contacts
and will still continue our contact
tracing and and and yet self-isolation
pieces but the fact that we have these
measures in place I think we'll
definitely slow down the number of new
cases but it'll also slow down the onset
of community transmission so we
definitely have time right now to take
into account all the new information
that we're seeing and and really have a
good idea and a good sense of what other
things we may need to do moving forward
who will meet limiter inoculum
sweeteners and so necessary in all of
him
Jasmine on of a disaffected unknowns
Polly hokum and our CEO is a queer as
mama ooh clever come on - you know it
ain't necessarily do resin conscious de
parler  la cerveza apply Sheila cub
over on until the namdak are in
transmission Donna community a lot of
similar compromise now privity who
nombre de Kooning with the deciduous
mark Li little bit older system the
Santee Lin a medicine Liz FMEA San with
an interpreter the the tongue proof Emma
a Cecil situation for deal okay on
separate pile on continue a pre-party a
Emporia G theorem is yoga daughter
affirmation so Congress what dr. Hamas
you know allow
Leo common ASEAN police officer as
mimosa pudica see they are challenged
Marcus AC Rakim Aetna save Rahman
massage Rotellini open to acquire
potential system DeSantis mama see
potentially medicine protocol is FM y a
a avoir in in shaft of a mafia don
konkey vu omaha applaud sila club as
mamas
you sure could evolve last following
question thank you
Hey Hey I don't yes both okay Chris
sorry I think that you are fuzzy
can you hear me now we this year I have
a question for premier eggs a premier
Asia would like to know would it be
possible eventually to a distinction
like those announced yesterday in new
homeland sanction that seems quite the
deterrent III guess we should leave that
anything is is possible I I won't take
anything off the table as such but at
this stage we feel very confident in
what we're proposing in developing the
the severity level higher in relation to
actions needed to be taken not in
relation to the health barometer as such
that's I leave that to dr. Russell what
I am trying to do here is raisin raise
the sense of urgency and so people take
it seriously before it becomes more
serious than we then were able to manage
and today
I'm convinced we can manage it if we
react accordingly thank you very much
we'd like to thank the members of the
media merci beaucoup to the Mondavi
vermicelli Mandela media this terminates
today's session satin satin sets SEO
merci